Reorder type and length in array type syntax (#1787)
carbon-language/carbon-lang: proposals/p1787.md

# Reorder type and length in array type syntax

<!--
Part of the Carbon Language project, under the Apache License v2.0 with LLVM
Exceptions. See /LICENSE for license information.
SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0 WITH LLVM-exception
-->

[Pull request](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/1787)

<!-- toc -->

## Table of contents

-   [Problem](#problem)
-   [Background](#background)
-   [Proposal](#proposal)
-   [Details](#details)
-   [Rationale](#rationale)
-   [Alternatives considered](#alternatives-considered)

<!-- tocstop -->

## Problem

> The status quo syntax for an expression representing the type of an array has

Reviewer: I think we've put you in a procedurally awkward position here, because no array type syntax has been through the evolution process; this is one of the places where we provisionally documented one possible design in order to help flesh out the language and provide scaffolding for other proposals. That being the case, I don't think this proposal can take that provisional syntax as a "status quo" which can be iteratively modified; instead, this should be a from-scratch proposal for Carbon's array type syntax. That means the proposal has to consider other syntaxes like `Array(T, N)` or `T[N]`, but you're already mostly doing that. In some ways that framing could even be easier, because you don't have to work as hard to overcome status-quo bias.

Alternatively, I think it would make sense to present this as a "Question for leads" issue (which the [evolution process](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/blob/trunk/docs/project/evolution.md) calls a "blocking issue") rather than a proposal. That would let you look at the `[T; N]` vs `[N; T]` question in isolation, and leave the broader discussion of other alternatives for whoever eventually writes the array proposal.

some slight annoyances and inconsistencies. This is certainly not a major issue,

> but it does impact users broadly; anyone writing multidimensional arrays.

Reviewer: I think this should be "nested arrays" rather than "multidimensional arrays".

`array[9][4]`. More generally, the concern is that users writing multi-indexing
will be tempted to assume the first index corresponds to the lexically first
extent in the type when the proper correspondence is to the outermost (and
hence, with the current syntax, lexically last) extent.

## Background

No background knowledge is required.

## Proposal

This concern can be addressed by simply reversing the order of the type and the
extent syntactically so that the length appears first. Then the example above
would be rewritten as

```
var array: [5; [10; i32]]
var element: array[4][9]
```

## Details

Because array indexing is read left-to-right, and each index peels off one layer
of a multidimensional array, reading indexes left-to-right corresponds to
indexing from the outermost to innermost extents. By listing the extents before
the type syntactically, this outer-to-inner ordering becomes compatible with the
left-to-right ordering.

## Rationale

This proposal addresses Carbon's goal to promote
[Code that is easy to read, understand, and write](/docs/project/goals.md#code-that-is-easy-to-read-understand-and-write).

> It does not have any affect (positive or negative) on any of the other goals.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It does not have any effect (positive or negative) on any of the other goals.
```

> It does not have any affect (positive or negative) on any of the other goals.

Reviewer 2: There might be some impact on familiarity for people coming from C++.

Author: I agree that c++ developers will be familiar with array extents appearing syntactically to the right. I do not think this familiarity is valuable to preserve for two reasons.

First, the syntax is already different, and C++ arrays also dont append extents on the right in a nested fashion.

Second, I don't think the risks associated with each of the failure modes are comparable. If someone expected types/extents in the wrong order, we would have a compilation error, whereas if they indexed in the wrong order we would have a runtime panic, undefined behavior, or a logic bug.

I suspect this comes down to how much weight we put on familiarity. All else equal, familiarity seems like a good default. I don't believe that's the situation here.

Since the crux of my claim is that this proposal would prevent bugs, maybe we should focus the discussion there? Do you agree? Are you skeptical? I must admit I believe this is valuable but only minorly so; it's probably an uncommon issue. But I also believe this syntax is approximately as familiar as the status quo that this is a pure (small) improvement.

> ## Alternatives considered

Reviewer 3: Should we consider the alternative of supporting true multidimensional arrays (as opposed to arrays of arrays)?
I.e. multiple sizes can be provided inside the same brackets, one per dimension:

```zig
// declaration syntax could look something like this:
var array: [i32; 5 x 10 x 2]
var array: [i32; 5, 10, 2]

// indexing could look like this:
var element = array[4, 9, 1]
var element = array[4][9][1]
```

This would make the syntax even more lightweight.

The multidimensional subscript operator syntax `[x, y, z]` is the same that we are getting in C++23: https://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2020/p2128r0.pdf

Author: I don't think this resolves the issue: Arrays of arrays would still be possible. Maybe they'd be discouraged? But we'd now have `[i32; 5, 10]` be more like `[[i32; 10]; 5]` which also seems backwards. Insofar as people can be confused by the backwardness of nested arrays where the length follows the type, I'd like to fix that.

I certainly would also be in favor syntactic sugar, so `[5, 10, 2; i32]` would be equivalent to `[5; [10; [2; i32]]]`, but I'd still want the extents to precede the types. I had thought about this sugar as well but wanted to keep this proposal focussed on just the ordering issue.

Reviewer: > I certainly would also be in favor syntactic sugar, so `[5, 10, 2; i32]` would be equivalent to `[5; [10; [2; i32]]]`

Multidimensional arrays should not be syntactic sugar for nested arrays; they're fundamentally different abstractions. For example:

- To get the size of the large dimension of `a: [[i32; 10]; 5]`, you'd have to say something like`a[0].Size()` (where the `0` is arbitrary but necessary unless you want to metaprogram on the type), whereas with `a: [i32; 5, 10]` it can just be something like `a.Size()[1]`.
- The number of dimensions of a multidimensional array can be a simple accessor, whereas for a nested array it would require something like a recursive free function.
- A nested array naturally gives you access to the N-1 dimensional slices along its major axis, but not along any other axis, whereas a multidimensional array can give you straightforward access to slices of any dimension along any axis.
- With nested arrays, the N-1 dimensional slices along the major axis are independent objects in their own right, with all that that implies for the object model. For example, they probably have separate lifetimes that are distinct from the lifetimes of both the whole array, and the individual elements.
- Related to the previous point, we're going to want a sanitized build mode that bounds-checks every array access, which probably means that each array will need to have a bound stored in shadow memory. That means that `a: [[i32; 10]; 5]` will need shadow storage for 6 bounds: the `5` for the outer array, and 5 redundant copies of `10` for the inner arrays. Natively multidimensional arrays can probably avoid this redundancy.

> I don't think this resolves the issue: Arrays of arrays would still be possible. Maybe they'd be discouraged?

If you're trying to represent a multidimensional collection of homogeneous data, nested 1-D arrays are going to be substantially inferior to natively multidimensional arrays -- see the list above for some reasons why. So the inherent properties of the nested array data structure will tend to discourage using it, whether or not our documentation does.

At least in principle, there may be use cases where nested arrays are a genuinely better abstraction, but if so they'd be use cases where nestedness _per se_ is an important part of the abstraction -- in other words, use cases where the inner arrays should be understood as entities in their own right, rather than merely slices through a multidimensional space. However, by the same token, I think the seemingly-reversed indexing order will be substantially less surprising in those use cases, because the user will already be thinking in terms of the fundamental outer -> inner order of nesting, rather than the semi-arbitrary left-to-right ordering of coordinates.

Oversimplified tl;dr: I think the net effect of this proposal will be to postpone the moment at which users discover that a nested array is the wrong abstraction for their use case. That may be somewhat beneficial, but I think the benefit is mild enough that it's outweighed by other considerations like consistency with related languages.

Reviewer 3: I agree. If you're using the wrong abstraction, the sooner you realize it, the better.

That and the listed differences could be used as a reason for adding multidimensional arrays to the language. But I don't know a lot of languages that provide built-in multidimensional arrays (at least C# does, but I don't know any systems language that does). In my experience it's also very rare to see arrays of arrays in code. Most languages provide a multidimensional array class in a library for the relatively rare cases when it's needed. 

So based on those two points, I'm not sure if there's a strong enough incentive for providing built-in multidimensional arrays, or optimizing the array syntax for nested arrays. I think it makes more sense to optimize the array syntax for the common use cases, for C++ familiarity, for avoidance of [precedence issues](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/1787#discussion_r933322056), etc. A multidimensional array class can be easily provided in a library.

Author: The questions about multidimensional arrays are valid, but I think they're a [straw man](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Straw_man). Whether we want to people to write nested arrays or not, they will. If we have multidimensional arrays, people will write arrays of multidimensional arrays or multidimensional arrays of multidimensional arrays. All of the extent/indexing concerns mentioned in this proposal still apply in those situations.

I think @emlai's prioritization list is roughly the correct one and match Carbon's goals regarding readability. I say "roughly" because I'm skeptical that familiarity is worth preserving, or even that reordering the extent and the type affects readability due to familiarity in a meaningful way.

Reviewer 4: For more native support of multidimensional arrays, I would prefer the current syntax for array declaration. It is close to Fortran array definition. There are some examples:
```fortran
  real(8), dimension(4) :: EigVal
  real(8), dimension(4,4) :: EigVec
```
or
```fortran
  real(8) :: EigVal(4), EigVec(4,4)
```
In both cases, firstly we know the type of variables (type is more important then dimensions)
They are close to current declaration of arrays in Carbon:
```
  var EigVal: [f64, 4];
  var EigVec: [[f64, 4], 4];
```
And here, we know type before definition of dimensions.

> But I don't know a lot of languages that provide built-in multidimensional arrays (at least C# does, but I don't know any systems language that does). In my experience it's also very rare to see arrays of arrays in code. 

Native multidimensional arrays are main point why Fortran is continuing to use nowadays. It is actively using in mathematical applications for modelling. There is many things which are mostly interesting in 2D or 3D cases rather then in 1D. Also, (I come from Quantum Chemistry) we have matrixes of electron interactions most of them are 2D (I saw some codes which uses arrays up to 6D arrays for high-level theories).

> A multidimensional array class can be easily provided in a library.

I would prefer native implementation. C++ is much more progressive language than Fortran but its libraries supporting multidimensional arrays requires to write a lot of code for slicing that makes tensor contraction is not readable.

Reviewer: > I don't know a lot of languages that provide built-in multidimensional arrays (at least C# does, but I don't know any systems language that does).

I'd argue that C and C++ provide built-in multidimensional arrays. For example, this is valid C/C++:

```c
int a[2][3] = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6};
```

`{1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6}` makes no sense as an initializer for an array of arrays of ints, but it does make sense as an initializer for an array of 6 ints.

As another example that's especially significant for this PR: the array type syntax is very definitely not nested. Consider:
```c++
using Array = int[3][4][5];
Array a = ...;
```
`a` is definitely not an array of 5 `int[3][4]`s. If it was, you could access the last `int[3][4]` in that array with `a[4]`, meaning that the index order would be reversed. C's decision to make the array declaration syntax match the indexing syntax _forces_ it to reject array nesting. In fact, C's declaration syntax is very cleverly constructed to stop you from writing a nested array declaration that specifies the size of more than one dimension.

Author: > They are close to current declaration of arrays in Carbon

This is what I'm proposing we change.

I think I agree that the element type is more important than the extents, but I don't have any way to quantify that importance. I'm also not sure that important things should necessarily be first. The slightly weaker claim I agree with is that they element type should be readily apparent. Because I expect the number of characters spent on extents to be low on average, I think the element type will be apparent.

@geoffromer I understood the syntactic claims you made but I think I'm missing the larger point you're making, and how it relates to multidimensional arrays. Also, are you making positive or negative value judgments on the suitability of C's syntax in Carbon? Or just observing? Thanks in advance for the clarification.

Reviewer: > @geoffromer I understood the syntactic claims you made but I think I'm missing the larger point you're making, and how it relates to multidimensional arrays. Also, are you making positive or negative value judgments on the suitability of C's syntax in Carbon? Or just observing? Thanks in advance for the clarification.

I think it's noteworthy that C avoids the index-order problem for nested arrays by steering programmers away from nested arrays, which in broad strokes is what I'm arguing Carbon should do. However, C had very different goals in this area, and its "steering" is far more heavy-handed than Carbon's can or should be, so I don't think that's a very decisive precedent.

Other than that, I was just observing. Among other things, it took me quite a while to understand how C's multidimensional array type syntax works, and either this proposal or a closely-related one is going to need to address that as an alternative-considered, so I thought it might save you (or whoever) some work.

It's worth looking at what other languages do for arrays.

**Rust** uses the syntax that is currently Carbon's status quo and therefore

> retains the same problem.

Reviewer: Do we know if this has been a problem for Rust in practice?

Author: No, I don't have any data on this. I also don't have any data on whether Go's choices cause problems.

**C/C++** simply invert any sequence of nested array specfiers. An array of five
elements each of type `int[10]` would be written as `int[5][10]`. This makes
some sense with the "declaration models usage" legacy, but does not make sense
in a language such as Carbon which has types use the same expression grammar as
values.

> **Go** also places array indices on the right but with a different syntax.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Go** also places array bounds on the left but with a different syntax.
```
(I think all the languages under consideration put array indexes on the right; what distinguishes Go is where the array bounds are written.)

Specifically, in Go you would write `[5][10]int`. This is also a viable option,
though it is slightly more restrictive on the grammar: If `[<expr>]` is ever to
be a valid expression, parsing `[5][10]int` becomes more complex, as we cannot
determine if we are looking at a sequence of array lengths or an indexing into

> the first square-bracketed expression without arbitrary lookahead.

Reviewer 2: This grammar restriction seems to exist whichever option we pick: `[<expr>; <expr>]` is a valid expression under the current approach, and arbitrary lookahead would already be required to distinguish that from `[<expr>]`. I think the Go approach might work out reasonably for us when considered in isolation, but there are precedence issues given that we also have postfix type operators -- is `[5]i32*` the same as `([5]i32)*`  or `[5](i32*)`, or are parentheses required?

Reviewer 3: That precedence issue stems from mixing prefix and postfix notations. If arrays used postfix notation like pointers, there would be no issue: `i32*[5]`. The syntax would also be familiar to C++ users. Likewise, if pointers and arrays both used prefix notation, there would also be no issue: `[5]*i32`. But this would be less familiar to C++ users.

Reviewer 5: Personally, I'd love to revisit the idea of prefix `*` for pointer types at some point, now that we're talking about potentially having `dyn Interface` rather than `DynPtr` and `DynBox`.  It would be pretty nice if we could write `*dyn Interface` like Rust, rather than needing `(dyn Interface)*` everywhere.
